This is tape 50, Channels of History. It’s still DAT tape 18. This is the
      third interview tape with Bev Maunsell and it’s 21 June 2000 and the
      DAT is on 1 hour 1 minute 44 seconds.              50_BC_SP

      So Bev, what was it that brought you and Graham back to Windorah, or back
      to the Channel Country, and what year was it?

Windorah Security

      02:01:02:16    1971 was the year, Trish. It was ummm a combination of all
      things. All things, including all things about living in this area, and missing
      the west. I think perhaps ummm freedom for the children was most … I
      mean as in safety issues or, you know, freedom to play wherever and
      virtually, you know, have that ummm the safety issue. I honestly don’t
      believe that I had ever had to ummm remove keys from a vehicle before. I
      was quite spoilt by that or ummm lock a house at night. Ummm not, the
      small things, I guess, that you enjoy but you don’t miss until you don’t have,
      like walking alone through the streets at night. I never ever felt safe, even
      going down to the local shop. I knew that I was safe. In hindsight I know
      that but it was just that coming from living on properties and then out in a
      place like Windorah where everybody was safe and you could, you know,
      you could break down on the road, change a tyre. You wouldn’t worry about
      the oncoming car, if there was one, if you were fortunate enough to see a car
      coming. It would never enter your head to think, ‘Oh, I mightn’t know this
      person’ because it doesn’t matter if you don’t, they will still hop out and give
      you a hand and whatever. A lot of those things I found hard to deal with.
      The fact that …

1 – SIDE B

Women/Land
      02:03:06:21    … and if they happened to stop, perhaps, you know, and this
    was just my feeling. I’m not insulting anybody in the city, that’s for sure,
    because it probably, my opinion probably sounds ridiculous to people
    who’ve lived there all of their life, but I did miss that feeling of safeness if I
    was home alone with the children at night – that feeling of, I didn’t like to
    lock up and plus I think that financially for us it was much harder living
    down there than it had been. Of course we had three children. We didn’t,
    we were married with children, we weren’t as single people in Windorah
    either. But most of all, it was homesickness.

So was it your decision to come back that Graham then went along with?

02:03:47:22    No. It wasn’t actually. It was a mutual decision. We … in
    those days there were telegrams and we received a telegram from my parents
    telling … Graham did, telling him that he could start work in Windorah the
    following week so that was about all we needed. But they were aware that
    we did want to come back out to the west and I should imagine my mother
    mentioned that to Ron McCullough, and hence the telegram.                But we
    certainly packed in a hurry and made arrangements and everything and made
    that working day.

So it was 1971? What work did your husband come back to and what life
    did you come back to in Windorah?

02:04:34:00    Well, ummm Graham came back to working on the roadworks
    there, that western road when they were putting that bitumen down, and
    ummm I actually lived in my parents’ home because it was vacant. I lived
    there with the children. He would go out to work, as most of the men that
    worked on that road, Mac’s Roadworks, the ones that came from Windorah,
    did. They would go out to work and sort of come in during the night or
    whatever. So everything changed for us, I guess. We were back in the west
    and Graham wasn’t home every day and every night but he would be going
    off to work and coming back in with the manager in the week or whatever
    and on weekends. Ummm I think possibly I appreciated mostly the things
    that I just mentioned that I wasn’t comfortable with. I also often joked, and
    yet there was a sense of truthness there, about I’d rather pay perhaps two or
    three dollars for a loaf of bread ummm than to have to lock the whole house
    up and go down and unlock the car and re-do all of that ummm to pay ninety
    cents for a loaf of bread, so I mean, I made reference to those sort of things
    quite a bit I guess.

And you could live on just his wage back out here?

02:06:06:18     Much more easily then. Yes, I think that perhaps coming,
    going from Windorah to Brisbane and ummm there was certainly a lot more
    spending during those years because of what was available that we hadn’t
    had access to, even going out. I mean, we were young and I think that was
    another thing. With the people connected with the racing world were very
    social people so we felt that we were keeping up with the Joneses. We were
    all very much the young married couple from Windorah, I’m sure, but yeah,
    we probably had quite a busy social life ummm and a very different social
    life too, but I enjoyed that just the same, but I think that it was a lot easier for
    us to live in Windorah and there’s always something to do. You know, the
    lady might get you to work at the shop for a little while, or whatever, you
    know. You sort of … it’s not that I didn’t work ummm I often did something
    when we came back out here, yeah.

And you were also doing all the family stuff, cooking and cleaning?

02:07:45:02     Yes, yes, Trish, and on the properties, like when we were at
    Currawilla, I mean, you ummm often the manager and his wife were away
    and you’re doing the cooking so you’re working, you know, and they would
    quite often get you over there to do whatever so I mean, things are shared
    around and you’re kept. I mean, you don’t pay for gas and electricity and
    groceries and things like that ummm you may earn a lower wage but you’re
    not paying out every day either.

What took you to Currawilla?

02:08:20:02     Probably the yearning to go back to station life.            That’s
    probably a strong … and is still with me today, that yearning. Ummm I think
    that’s as strong as ummm the need to move back to the west if you move
    away.      I think people change, though.   I … people do change and
    circumstances change and, you know, I could probably say well yes, I talk
    about coming back to the west but then I wouldn’t know whether I might
    move away from the west at some time either, you know.

What did you love about station life?          C.BARS      02:09:14    –
    02:10:59